---
title: "Hello SML!"
date: 2020-09-02T16:01:13-05:00
draft: false
---
Standard ML is a functional language. It's data is immutable and thus assignments are not allowed. It is *strongly typed*, meaning type of all values and variables can be determined at compile time. These features are in stark contrast with JavaScript that I have been learning lately and thus I thought to spend some time learning it.

Learning a new language entails learning:

1. *syntax* of its programming constructs: For example, how do you write a conditional?
2. *symantics* of those constructs: That is, what rules are used to *type-check* (if it has types) its constructs and what rules are used to *evaluate* those constructs.
3. *idioms*: There could be multiple ways to do a certain task, but which way is better?
4. *libraries*: What pre-existing code can I use without re-inventing? for example, file I/O
5. *Tooling*: What tooling is available, for example, REPLs, debuggers, compilers etc.

Since it usually is a long shot to do all at once, it seems more effective to just focus on learning syntax and symantics first.

## Bindings
An ML program is made up of bindings. Each binding is first checked for syntax which (if correct) is followed by type-checking the binding following which (if it type-checks) it is finally evaluated. We will start with two types of bindings:

### Variable Bindings
1. Syntax: `val x = e;`. Here, x is the variable name and e is an expression. The expression may contain sub-expressions, which may further contain more sub-expressions and so on.
2. Type-check: All bindings preceding the current one have a type. This mapping of *var : type* is stored in this thing called *static environment*. Using this information, type of expression `e` is found, which becomes the type of binding `x`. Static environment is updated with this binding.
3. Evaluation: Expression `e` is evaluated, using values of preceding variables (this *variable -> value* mapping exists in this thing called *dynamic environment*) to a value *v*, and this becomes the value of the binding. Dynamic environment is updated with this binding.
4. Example: Here, the expression is `2+3`, which has a type *int* because 2 and 3 have type *int*. Static environment is updated with *x: int* and then expression is evaluated. This expression does not depend on any preceding bindings and evaluated to 5. Dynamic envionment is updated with *x -> 5*.
```sml
- val x = 2 + 3;
val x = 5 : int
-
```

### Function Bindings
1. Syntax: `fun x0(x1: t1, ..., xn: tn) = e;`. This function, x0, has n parameters, x1...xn that have type t1...tn and e is an expression.
2. Type-check: A new static environment is created with preceding bindings and x1: t1, ..., xn: tn and x0: t1*...*tn->t additional bindings. Using this static environment, type of e is determined which must be of type t for this function binding to type-check. ML's *type inference* does this magic job. After this, x0 is added to the top-level static environment.
3. Evaluation: x0 simply evaluates to x0 itself, which is added to the dynamic environment.
4. Example:
```sml
- fun square_n(n: int) = n * n;
val square_n = fn : int -> int
- 
```

## More Expressions
Besides the expressions involving binary operators (e1 / e2,  e1 mod e2 or e1 <> e2), following three expressions will help us write more useful programs:
### Conditional Expression
1. Syntax: `if e1 then e2 else e3;`
2. Type-check: Under the current static environment if e1 is of type *bool* and e2 and e3 have same type, then the type of whole expression is the type of e2 (and e3).
3. Evaluation: Under the current dynamic environment, if e1 evaluates to `true` then e2 is evaluated and its value is the value of the whole conditional expression. If e1 evaluates to `false` then e3 is evaluated and its value is the value of the whole conditional expression.
4. Example: In ML, `~` is used for negation. 
```sml
- if x > 0 then x else ~x;
val it = 5 : int
- 
```

### Function Call
After we declare a function binding, we can use it in a function call expression to evaluate it.
1. Syntax: `e0(e1, ..., en)`
2. Type Check: e0 must have a type t1\*...\*tn->t and e1,..., en have type t1,...,tn respectively. Then the whole expression has type t.
3. Evaluation: Using the environment at the point of call, e1,..., en are evaluated to values v1,..., vn. Also e0 is evaluated to v0, which must be a function. Then the dynamic environment at the point where the function was *defined* is extended with the function's arguments mapped to v1,...,vn, using which the function's body expression e is evaluated. This mechanism is called *lexical scoping*.
4. Example: Here we use our previous function binding to square a number. It only has one argument which is evaluated to 5 and then the function body is evaluated.
```sml
- square_n(2+3);
val it = 25 : int
- 
```

### Let Expression
Let expressions allow you to create bindings with local scope.
1. Syntax: `let b1 b2 ... bn in e end`. Here b1,..., bn are local bindings. Note that these could be variable bindings or function bindings.
2. Type-check: *Scope* (where the binding can be used) of each binding in a let expression is subsequent bindings and its body e. Thus b2 can use b1, b3 can use b1 and b2 while e can use b1,...,bn (in addition to other bindings in the static environment). Variable and function binding type-check rules apply as described above. Type of e is the type of entire let expression.
3. Evaluation: Each binding is sequentially evaluated to create a larger dynamic environment for the subsequent binding. e is finally evaluated using values of all previous bindings (in addition to other bindings in the dynamic environment leading up to let expression call). The value of e is the value of entire let expression.
4. Example:
```sml
- let val a = 5 in a+1 end;
val it = 6 : int
- 
```

## Compound Data
One can use atomic data like integers (2, ~5, etc.), reals (3.14, 6.23e23 etc.), booleans (true, false), or strings ("hello world"), to build more complex data structures. We will start with pairs, tuples and lists:
### Pairs
1. Syntax: `(e1, e2)`
2. Type-check: if e1 has a type t1 and e2 has a a type t2, then the pair has a type t1\*t2. Note that t1 and t2 can be different types.
3. Evaluation: if e1 has a value v1 and e2 has a value v2, then the pair has a value (v1, v2).
4. Example: Note that pair can contain pairs and so on.
```sml
- (3, 3.14);
val it = (3,3.14) : int * real
- ((true, false), (1, 1));
val it = ((true,false),(1,1)) : (bool * bool) *  (int * int)
- 
```
5. Access: `#1 pr` will give first component of the pair *pr* and `#2 pr` will give second component.

### Tuples
Tuples is simply pair extended to more than two components. All the above rules apply otherwise.

### Lists
Lists can contain any number of components and length is usually unknown at compile time. Thus they can contain components of only one type.
1. Syntax: `[e1, ..., en]`. This is a list containing n elements. Usually lists are created dynamically by *consing* an element to the front using `e1 :: e2` where e2 is a list of type t and e1 is an element of type t.
2. Type-check: if t is the type of list elements, then the list has type `t list`
3. Evaluation: If e1,..., en evaluates to v1,..., vn then the value of list is $[v1,..., vn]$
4. Example: Here, 1 is consed to the front of the list of two integers.
```sml
- 1 :: [2, 3];
val it = [1,2,3] : int list
- 
```
5. Access: `null l` evaluates to `true` for empty list and `false` otherwise. `hd l` gives the first elements and `tl l` gives the list excluding the first element.
```sml
- hd [1, 2, 3];
val it = 1 : int
- tl [1, 2, 3];
val it = [2,3] : int list
- 
```

### Options
Option is useful when a container either contains nothing or only one thing.
1. Syntax: `NONE` is an options containing nothing. `SOME e` is an option containing value of expression e.
2. Type-check: `NONE` has type `'a option` while `SOME e` has type `t option` where t is the type of e.
3. Evaluation: `SOME e` has value v if e evaluates to v.
4. Example:
```sml
- NONE;
val it = NONE : 'a option
- SOME true;
val it = SOME true : bool option
- 
```
5. Access: `isSome o` evaluates to `false` if o is NONE and true otherwise. `valOf o` evaluates to value carried by SOME option.
```sml
- isSome NONE;
val it = false : bool
- valOf (SOME 2);
val it = 2 : int
- 
```