---
title: "Micro-benchmarking in OCaml"
date: 2020-11-10T06:20:37-06:00
draft: false
tags: ["OCaml"]
---

It is instructive to understand time and space requirements of functions we write and micro-benchmarking tools of a language helps us accomplish this task. Ocaml has a library called *Core_bench* for this task. Let's see how it works.

In the example code below, we do three things. First, we open two modules - `Core` and `Core_bench`. Next, we create two functions that we want to benchmark - sum of n natural numbers and factorial. Third part is where the benchmarking is actually performed. `Bench.make_command` takes a list of tests as its argumen. This is wrapped inside `Command.run`, which why we needed the `Core` module as well. Each test is created using `Bench.Test.create` function which takes a named argument, `name`, and an anonymous function wrapped inside parenthesis. The body of the function has `ignore` followed by our test function.

```ocaml
open Core
open Core_bench

let rec sumn n = if n = 0 then 0 else n + sumn (n-1)
let rec fact n = if n = 0 then 1 else n * fact (n-1)

let () =
  Command.run (Bench.make_command [
      Bench.Test.create ~name:"sumn"
        (fun () -> ignore (sumn 10));
      Bench.Test.create ~name:"fact"
        (fun () -> ignore (fact 10));])
```
When we compile and run the above code, each function will be run for 10 seconds and results will be displayed in a nice table in console:

```
Estimated testing time 20s (2 benchmarks x 10s). Change using '-quota'.
┌──────┬──────────┬────────────┐
│ Name │ Time/Run │ Percentage │
├──────┼──────────┼────────────┤
│ sumn │  19.61ns │     77.80% │
│ fact │  25.20ns │    100.00% │
└──────┴──────────┴────────────┘
```
The table above shows that sumn took about 20 ns to finish while fact took about 25. Thus sumn ran about 22% faster than factorial.

This is just the bare minimum to get started. There is an interesting [design discussion](https://blog.janestreet.com/core_bench-micro-benchmarking-for-ocaml/) about the tool. Based on the memory consumed, it can also show columns with memory used in minor and major heaps, which is the concept used by OCaml's garbage collector. 